[docs] Revise Okta SAML docs (#41493)
metabase/metabase: docs/people-and-groups/saml-okta.md

{% include plans-blockquote.html feature="Okta SAML authentication" %}

1. [Turn on SAML-based SSO in Metabase](#turn-on-saml-based-sso-in-metabase)
2. [Set up SAML in Okta](#set-up-saml-in-okta).
3. [Set up SAML up in Metabase](#set-up-saml-in-metabase).

You can also optionally [configure group mappings](#configure-group-mappings) to automatically assign Okta users to Metabase groups.

See [authenticating with SAML](./authenticating-with-saml.md) for general SAML info.

## Turn on SAML-based SSO in Metabase

In the **Admin**>**Settings** section of the Admin area, go to the **Authentication** tab and click on **Set up** under **SAML**.

You'll see a SAML configuration form like this:

![SAML form](images/saml-form.png)

You'll need to use the information in this form to set up SAML in Okta.

## Set up SAML in Okta

> Before configuring SAML authentication in Metabase, you'll need to create and configure a new SAML app integration in Okta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before configuring SAML authentication in Metabase, you'll need to create a new SAML app integration in Okta.
```

> ### Create an app integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create an app integration in Okta
```

From the Okta **Admin** console, [create a new SAML app integration][okta-saml-docs] to use with Metabase.

### Configure Okta SAML settings

> To configure Okta app integration with Metabase, you'll need to use the information in Metabase **Admin panel** > **Authentication** > **SAML**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure Okta app integration with Metabase, you'll need to use the information found in Metabase in the **Admin panel** > **Authentication** > **SAML** section.
```

#### General settings

| Okta SAML                       | Metabase SAML                                                                                                                               |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Single sign-on URL**          | **URL the IdP should redirect to**. This is your Metabase [Site URL][site-url] -- it should start with `https://` and end with `/auth/sso`. |
| **Audience URI (SP Entity ID)** | **SAML Application Name** ("Metabase" by default)                                                                                           |

#### Attribute statements

> Metabase requires you to set some attributes in Okta:
> 
> - email address
> - first name (given name)
> - last name (surname)
> 
> These attributes will be passed from Okta to Metabase during authentication to automatically log people into their Metabase accounts.
> 
> In **Attribute statements (optional)** section of the Okta application SAML setting, create attribute statements for the email, first name, and last name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Attribute statements (optional)** section of the Okta application SAML setting, create the following attribute statements:

- email address
- first name (given name)
- last name (surname)

Even though Okta says these are optional, Metabase requires them. Okta will pass these attributes to Metabase during authentication to automatically log people in to Metabase.
```

The original phrasing (which repeats the attributes) could be confusing given the conflict between "requires" and "optional". The rephrasing omits the repetition of attributes and explains the requirement.

| Name                                                                 | Value          |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/emailaddress` | user.email     |
| `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/givenname`    | user.firstName |
| `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/surname`      | user.lastName  |

> The names of attribute statement in Okta should match the attribute names in Metabase. If you use non-default attribute names in Okta app configuration, you will also need to change the names for the attribute fields in Metabase in **Admin panel** > **Authentication** > **SAML**

Reviewer: Should we mention case sensitivity? And is non-default the same as "custom"? What about additional?

```suggestion
The names of attribute statement in Okta should match the attribute names in Metabase (names are case sensitive). If you want to use custom attribute names in your Okta app configuration, you'll also need to change the names for the attribute fields in Metabase: **Admin panel** > **Authentication** > **SAML**.
```

Author: "custom attribute names" had the ambiguity whether it's `(custom attribute) names` or `custom (attribute names)` because there's a concept of a custom attribute (and it's even something that we reference later in the article). 

But in our case it's about using `(custom name)` for an attribute statement (and those attribute statements check regular, non-custom attributes).

There were customers who used different (from MB-provided default) names in Okta and had problems. They just needed to copy paste the same names back into MB

> > **End-users should not be able to edit the email address attribute**. Your IdP will pass the email address attribute to Metabase in order to log people into their Metabase accounts (or to create an account on the first login). If a person can change the email address attribute, they'll potentially be able to access Metabase accounts other than their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Make sure that people cannot edit their email address attribute**. To log people in to your Metabase (or to create a Metabase account on first login), your IdP will pass the email address attribute to Metabase. If a person can change the email address attribute, they'll potentially be able to access Metabase accounts other than their own.
```

Also: how should an admin make sure that people can't edit their email address attribute? Is there an explicit action the admin needs to take to ensure that the email attribute is uneditable by account holders?

Author: @jeff-bruemmer To be honest, I am not sure, I kept this as-is from the previous version of the docs. We say this in all SAML docs but don't  explain how to make this happen. I think it's a property of the user profile attribute in the IdP

  ![Metabase group mapping](images/saml-okta-groups.png)

### Map Okta User Groups to Metabase groups

1. Create Okta User groups corresponding to Metabase groups and assign them to Okta users.
2. In Okta's **SAML Settings** for the Metabase app integration, add a new attribute statement `MetabaseGroupName`, set the type to "Basic", and the value to:

   ```
   Arrays.flatten(getFilteredGroups({"groupID1", "groupID2"}, "group.name", 100))
   ```

   where the Group IDs in `{"groupId1", "groupId2"}` are the groups that you would like to map to Metabase groups. You can find the Okta Group ID in the URL of the group's page: `https://your-okta-url.okta.com/admin/group/GROUP_ID`.

   This expression will retrieve the names of Okta User Groups that a user is a part of and return them as an array.

   ![New attribute statement for groups](images/okta-group-attribute.png)

   > Your Okta account has to have `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES` enabled, as Metabase expects Okta to pass attributes as an array. If your Okta account is old, you might need to reach out to Okta support to enable `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES`.

>    Next, you'll need to set up tell Metabase how to map Okta groups to Metabase groups.

Author: ```suggestion
   Next, you'll need to tell Metabase how to map Okta groups to Metabase groups.
```

</saml2:Assertion>
```

## Set up SAML in Metabase

> Once you set up your SAML app in Okta, you'll need to configure SAML in Metabase. You'll need some information from Okta, so go to the page for the Metabase app integration in Okta, and in the **Sign On** tab, and click on **View SAML setup instructions**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you set up your SAML app in Okta, you'll need to configure SAML in Metabase. You'll need some information from Okta:

1. In Okta, go to the page for your Metabase app integration.
2. Go to the **Sign On** tab.
3. Click on **View SAML setup instructions**.
```

Use the information from Okta SAML instructions to fill the Metabase SAML form in **Admin panel** > **Authentication** > **SAML**:

| Metabase SAML                      | Okta SAML                            |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| SAML Identity Provider URL         | Identity Provider Single Sign-On URL |
| SAML Identity Provider Certificate | X.509 Certificate\*                  |
| SAML Identity Provider Issuer      | Identity Provider Issuer             |

\*Make sure to include any header and footer comments, like `---BEGIN CERTIFICATE---` and `---END CERTIFICATE---`.

## Configure group mappings

> You can configure Metabase to automatically assign users to Metabase groups when they log in. You'll need to create a SAML attribute statement that will pass the groups information to Metabase, and then configure Metabase to read this attribute and map its contents to Metabase groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure Metabase to automatically assign people to Metabase groups when they log in. You'll need to create a SAML attribute statement that will pass the groups information to Metabase, and then configure Metabase to read this attribute and map its contents to Metabase groups.
```

> You can either [use a custom user profile attribute](#use-a-user-profile-attribute-to-assign-groups) that contains user's Metabase groups, or [leverage Okta User Groups](#map-okta-user-groups-to-metabase-groups).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use either:

-  [A custom user profile attribute](#use-a-user-profile-attribute-to-assign-groups) that contains user's Metabase groups.
-  [Okta User Groups](#map-okta-user-groups-to-metabase-groups).
```

### Use a user profile attribute to assign groups

You can create a custom user profile attribute and fill it with the Metabase groups for each user.

1. In Okta **Profile Editor**, [create a new User Profile attribute](https://help.okta.com/en-us/content/topics/users-groups-profiles/usgp-add-custom-user-attributes.htm) called `metabaseGroups`, which can be a `string` or a `string array`.
   ![New User Profile attribute](images/okta-new-attribute.png)
2. For each user in Okta, fill the `metabaseGroups` attribute with their Metabase group(s).

   ![Metabase groups attribute](images/okta-adding-groups.png)

   We recommend that you use the same names for the groups in Okta as you would use in Metabase.

>    Keep in mind that Metabase groups don't have to correspond to Okta User Groups. If you'd like to leverage Okta User Groups to set up Metabase Groups, see [Map Okta User Groups to Metabase groups](#map-okta-user-groups-to-metabase-groups).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Metabase groups don't have to correspond to Okta User Groups. If you'd like to use Okta User Groups to set up Metabase Groups, see [Map Okta User Groups to Metabase groups](#map-okta-user-groups-to-metabase-groups).
```

Yes, "leverage" avoids the "use ... User" situation, but it's still pretty corporatese.

>    > Metabase needs the list of group names to be passed as an array. For this, your Okta account has to have `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES` enabled, otherwise Okta will concatenate the group names instead of passing them as an array. If your Okta account is old, you might need to reach out to Okta support to enable `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > Your Okta account has to have `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES` enabled, as Metabase expects Okta to pass attributes as an array. If your Okta account is old, you might need to reach out to Okta support to enable `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES`.
```

This phrasing frontloads the requirement, followed by the explanation.

3. In the **Okta SAML settings** for the Metabase app integration, add a new attribute statement `MetabaseGroupName` with the value `user.metabaseGroups` (the profile attribute you just created)

   ![New attribute statement referencing the attribute](images/okta-new-attribute-custom.png)

4. In **Metabase SAML settings**:

> - Turn on **Synchronize Group Memberships**
> - For each of the groups you added to Okta users, set up a new mapping to a Metabase group
> - In **Group attribute name**, enter `MetabaseGroupName` (the name of the SAML attribute statement)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Turn on **Synchronize Group Memberships**.
- For each of the groups you added to Okta users, set up a new mapping to a Metabase group.
- In **Group attribute name**, enter `MetabaseGroupName` (the name of the SAML attribute statement).
```

  ![Metabase group mapping](images/saml-okta-groups.png)

### Map Okta User Groups to Metabase groups

1. Create Okta User groups corresponding to Metabase groups and assign them to Okta users.

> 2. In Okta **SAML Settings** for the Metabase app integration, add a new attribute statement `MetabaseGroupName`, set the type to "Basic", and the value to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In Okta's **SAML Settings** for the Metabase app integration, add a new attribute statement `MetabaseGroupName`, set the type to "Basic", and the value to:
```

   ```
   Arrays.flatten(getFilteredGroups({"groupID1", "groupID2"}, "group.name", 100))
   ```

   where the Group IDs in `{"groupId1", "groupId2"}` are the groups that you would like to map to Metabase groups. You can find the Okta Group ID in the URL of the group's page.

>    ![Okta group URL](images/okta-group-url.png)

Reviewer: Can we make this a code block? I'm not sure why it's an image.

   This expression will retrieve the names of Okta User Groups that a user is a part of and return them as an array.

   ![New attribute statement for groups](images/okta-group-attribute.png)

>    > Metabase needs the list of group names to be passed as an array. For this, your Okta account has to have `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES` enabled, otherwise Okta will concatenate the group names instead of passing them as an array. If your Okta account is old, you might need to reach out to Okta support to enable `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > Your Okta account has to have `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES` enabled, as Metabase expects Okta to pass attributes as an array. If your Okta account is old, you might need to reach out to Okta support to enable `SAML_SUPPORT_ARRAY_ATTRIBUTES`.
```

Same as above.

   Next, you'll need to set up tell Metabase how to map Okta groups to Metabase groups.

3. In **Metabase SAML settings**:

> - Turn on **Synchronize Group Memberships**
> - For each of the groups you added to Okta users, set up a new mapping to a Metabase group
> - In **Group attribute name**, enter `MetabaseGroupName` (the name of the SAML attribute statement)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Turn on **Synchronize Group Memberships**.
- For each of the groups you added to Okta users, set up a new mapping to a Metabase group.
- In **Group attribute name**, enter `MetabaseGroupName` (the name of the SAML attribute statement).
```
